# TCC - Estudando autômatos celulares com a linguagem de programação Go

## TCC - Studying cellular automata using the Go programming language

### ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS   -------------------------------------------
First and foremost, special thanks to Professor Dr. Breno Ferraz de Oliveira for overall guidance during the making of this project, including insights, suggestions, corrections, and small code fixes.

Special thanks to Luiz Felipe Locatelli Giroldo for a myriad of reasons.

This section includes any sources read or viewed in making the three cellular automata codes (GoL, SmoothLife, and Lenia), including previous work, articles, blogs, websites, and repositories, in alphabetical order.
- My and Professor Oliveira's work on Go code for a May-Leonard RPS (rock-paper-scissors) model [(work available in this repository, download to read)](https://github.com/bbittencourt-go/TCC/blob/main/Relat%C3%B3rio_Final_Go_C.pdf) [(code also available in this repository, under /Code)](Code/may_leonard_rps.go) 
- [Bert Wang-chak Chan (Chakazul)'s Lenia portal](https://chakazul.github.io/lenia.html)
- [Bert Wang-chak Chan's Lenia coding tutorial](https://colab.research.google.com/github/OpenLenia/Lenia-Tutorial/blob/main/Tutorial_From_Conway_to_Lenia.ipynb)
- [Bert Wang-chak Chan (Chakazul)'s Lenia code repository](https://github.com/Chakazul/Lenia)
- [Bert Wang-chak Chan (Chakazul)'s online Lenia simulator](https://chakazul.github.io/Lenia/JavaScript/Lenia.html)
- [Bert Wang-chak Chan (Chakazul)'s online Primordia simulator](https://chakazul.github.io/Primordia/Primordia.html)


This repository includes:
- Code for simulations of cellular automata (Game of Life, SmoothLife and Lenia) in Go language. The overall structure of the code for the three cellular automata was heavily borrowed from my first code project, which was Go code for a specific RPS (rock-paper-scissors) model (http://www.eaic.uem.br/eaic2023/anais/artigos/6438.pdf). In Lenia's case, the code was also inspired by Bert Wang-chak Chan's code (https://github.com/Chakazul/Lenia) and the apparent mechanisms of his publicly available Lenia simulations (https://chakazul.github.io/Lenia/JavaScript/Lenia.html);
- Results: videos generated after running said simulations (download to watch!);
- Plot files (in "plt" folder) to generate .png files (of the whole grid for every generation) and .pdf files (population density graphs);
- TCC (paper, .pdf file. Download to read! PT-BR only).

Details:
- No external libraries are used in any of the three simulations, meaning there is no need for any downloads.
- Functions ic (initial condition, "generation zero") and op (to create files regarding the states of each cell and the population density for every generation).
- In Lenia's case, a 2D manual convolution method is written as a function, based on well-known convolution methods, as it is a required step to reach Lenia according to Bert Wang-chak Chan's paper.

Instructions:
- You can run these simulations if Go is installed on your computer. If not, install Go at https://go.dev/;
- Download the simulations (.go files). You may need to move the files after download to go/src on your computer (in my experience, it was unnecessary). Otherwise, it's recommended to create a separate folder and move the .go files to this destination so that later data files are neatly stored, separate from unrelated files;
- Open the terminal (Windows cmd, Cygwin, etc.), move to the directory where the .go files are stored, and type in "go run simulation-name.go" (adjust "simulation-name" accordingly);
- Each simulation will produce a finite number of .dat files (specified in the code as the constant NG, number of generations). These .dat files contain the entire grid, each number imprinted representing the current state of the cell at the specified position;
- To generate grid images from the .dat files, you will need Gnuplot. Ensure it is on your computer or download it at http://www.gnuplot.info/download.html;
- Download and edit the grid.plt file to your specifications (number of generations, grid size, .dat files names, output files names, etc.). Ensure it is in the same directory as the .dat files and run it by simply clicking;
      - The grid.plt file contains a rainbow color palette to plot SmoothLife and Lenia simulations (as these use decimal numbers). To plot Conway's Game of Life, you may want to adjust it to only two colors.
- The same printing process can be done using the pop-density.plt file and the population density .dat file generated by the simulation. In this case, one .pdf graph can display many data files (curves) at once, so adjust the file according to your intentions;
- To make videos from the .png images, open the terminal after generating all images and ensure you are in the same directory. Then, copy and paste the following command, replacing "image-%d.png" and "video.mp4" as necessary:

ffmpeg -r 7 -i image-%d.png -c:v libx264 -profile:v baseline -level 3.0 -pix_fmt yuv420p -y video.mp4

- Parameters may be edited in the .go files. They are generally presented as constants, variables, equations or functions, making them easily alterable.
- There are two initial conditions to be used in these simulations. One is a pseudorandom state distribution through the entire grid (the standard beginning for GoL) and the other is the random spawning of squares containing pseudorandom decimal numbers, whilst the rest of the grid is null. The latter initial condition is a better option for SmoothLife and Lenia, as it does not encourage the growth of something called an "expansive mass" (a sort of amoeba that expands until it takes over the entire grid, effectively hindering interactions and formations of any interesting patterns or behaviors). Therefore, the SmoothLife and Lenia simulations are coded to cater to this initial condition. The user may alter this to their wishes.
